docs/methodology/FIRST_PRINCIPLES_REASSESSMENT.md, before:

# First-Principles Reassessment

**Document Status**: Critical Analysis
**Last Updated**: 2026-01-26
**Purpose**: Re-derive capabilities from first principles based on all research

---

## The Question

Starting fresh: **What are the irreducible cognitive operations an autonomous, grounded agent needs?**

---

## 1. First-Principles Derivation

### 1.1 The Agent Loop (from ReAct research)

Every agent operates in a loop:
```
PERCEIVE → UNDERSTAND → REASON → ACT → VERIFY → (repeat)
```

Plus cross-cutting concerns:
- **REMEMBER** — Persist state across loops
- **COORDINATE** — Work with other agents
- **MODEL** — Maintain world representation

### 1.2 Irreducible Operations per Phase

**PERCEIVE** — How agents acquire information:
| Operation | Description | Why Irreducible |
|-----------|-------------|-----------------|
| `retrieve` | Get specific data by ID/path | Pull by reference ≠ query |
| `search` | Query by criteria | Query ≠ pull |
| `observe` | Watch current state | Passive sensing ≠ active query |
| `receive` | Accept pushed data | Push ≠ pull |

Wait — is `observe` distinct from `retrieve` and `search`?
- `retrieve`: "Get file X" (known target)
- `search`: "Find files matching Y" (criteria-based)
- `observe`: "What is the current state?" (introspection)
- `receive`: "Wait for event Z" (passive)

**Yes, these are distinct.**

But can we simplify? Let's try:
- `get` — Acquire information (active)
- `receive` — Accept information (passive)

No, this loses important distinctions. `retrieve` vs `search` matters for agent reasoning. Keep 4.

---

**UNDERSTAND** — How agents make sense of information:
| Operation | Description | Why Irreducible |
|-----------|-------------|-----------------|
| `detect` | Find patterns/occurrences | Pattern matching |
| `classify` | Assign labels/categories | Categorization |
| `measure` | Quantify values | Quantification |
| `predict` | Forecast future | Temporal projection |
| `compare` | Evaluate options | Comparison |
| `discover` | Find unknown patterns | Exploration |

Is `discover` distinct from `detect`?
- `detect`: Find instances of a **known** pattern
- `discover`: Find **unknown** patterns in data

**Yes, semantically distinct.** Detection is recognition; discovery is exploration.

Can we combine `classify` and `detect`?
- `detect`: "Is there a cat in this image?" (binary/location)
- `classify`: "What kind of animal is this?" (categorization)

**No, these are different operations.** Keep 6.

---

**REASON** — How agents think and plan:
| Operation | Description | Why Irreducible |
|-----------|-------------|-----------------|
| `plan` | Create action sequence | Planning |
| `decompose` | Break into subproblems | Problem decomposition |
| `critique` | Identify weaknesses | Self-evaluation |
| `explain` | Justify conclusions | Explanation |

Is `decompose` distinct from `plan`?
- `plan`: Create a sequence of steps
- `decompose`: Break a problem into smaller problems

**Arguably redundant.** Decomposition is often part of planning. But Skills documentation shows hierarchical task decomposition as a distinct pattern.

Is `critique` distinct from `compare`?
- `compare`: Evaluate A vs B vs C
- `critique`: Find weaknesses in A

**Yes, distinct.** Critique is evaluation against an ideal, not comparison between options.

**Decision**: Keep `decompose` and `critique` — they're common enough patterns in agent workflows.

---

**MODEL** — How agents represent the world:

This is where your critique is most valid. Let's reconsider:

| Current Name | Proposed | Description |
|--------------|----------|-------------|
| `world-state` | `state` | Represent current world state |
| `state-transition` | `transition` | Represent how state changes |
| `causal-model` | `?` | Represent cause-effect |
| `ground` | `ground` | Anchor claims to evidence |
| `resolve-identity` | `resolve` | Deduplicate entities |
| `simulate` | `simulate` | Run what-if scenarios |

**Problem with `causal-model`**: "Model" as a verb is weak. What's the action?

Options:
1. `cause` — Awkward ("cause a relationship"?)
2. `attribute` — "Attribute effects to causes" (clearer!)
3. `link` — "Link causes to effects" (but too generic)
4. `model` — Generic, parameterized by type

**Actually, let's question whether we need separate modeling capabilities at all.**

What if MODELING is a single capability with parameters?
```yaml
model:
  input:
    target: any
    type: enum[state, transition, causation, schema]
  output:
    representation: structured_model
```

This parallels our DIS verb parameterization. But the Skills documentation shows these as distinct operations:
- Creating a state snapshot ≠ defining transitions
- Defining transitions ≠ establishing causation

**Decision**: Keep them separate but use simpler names:
- `state` — Create state representation
- `transition` — Define state dynamics
- `attribute` — Establish cause-effect (new name)
- `ground` — Anchor to evidence
- `resolve` — Deduplicate entities
- `simulate` — Run scenarios

Wait — is `resolve` (entity resolution) truly a fundamental capability? Or is it:
`detect` (find duplicates) + `classify` (same entity?) + `integrate` (merge)?

Let me check against Skills patterns... Entity resolution appears in data integration workflows. It's common enough to warrant a name, but maybe it's a workflow pattern?

**Decision**: Remove `resolve` — it's a composition of detect + classify + integrate. The MODELING layer becomes 5 capabilities.

---

**SYNTHESIZE** — How agents create new things:
| Operation | Description | Why Irreducible |
|-----------|-------------|-----------------|
| `generate` | Produce new content | Creation |
| `transform` | Convert between formats | Conversion |
| `integrate` | Merge multiple sources | Fusion |

These are distinct and necessary. Keep 3.

---

**EXECUTE** — How agents change the world:
| Operation | Description | Why Irreducible |
|-----------|-------------|-----------------|
| `execute` | Run code/script | Deterministic execution |
| `mutate` | Change persistent state | State change |
| `send` | Transmit externally | External communication |

Per Skills alignment, these are distinct:
- `execute`: Run a script, get output (deterministic, reversible in concept)
- `mutate`: Change a file/database (side effects, may not be reversible)
- `send`: Call external API (leaves your control)

Keep 3.

---

**VERIFY** — How agents ensure correctness:
| Operation | Description | Why Irreducible |
|-----------|-------------|-----------------|
| `verify` | Check conditions | Validation |
| `checkpoint` | Save state | Recovery point |
| `rollback` | Restore state | Recovery action |
| `constrain` | Enforce limits | Guardrails |
| `audit` | Record provenance | Accountability |

Are all 5 necessary?
- `verify`: Check postconditions — essential
- `checkpoint`: Save before risky operation — essential for recovery
- `rollback`: Restore on failure — essential for recovery
- `constrain`: Enforce limits — could be part of `verify`?
- `audit`: Record what happened — essential for accountability

`constrain` vs `verify`:
- `verify`: "Is X true?" (check)
- `constrain`: "Ensure X stays within bounds" (enforce)

**These are different.** Verify is passive checking; constrain is active enforcement.

Keep 5.

---

**REMEMBER** — How agents persist state:
| Operation | Description | Why Irreducible |
|-----------|-------------|-----------------|
| `persist` | Store durably | Write to memory |
| `recall` | Retrieve stored | Read from memory |

These are the minimal memory operations. Keep 2.

---

**COORDINATE** — How agents work together:
| Operation | Description | Why Irreducible |
|-----------|-------------|-----------------|
| `delegate` | Assign task to another | Task distribution |
| `synchronize` | Achieve state agreement | Consensus |
| `invoke` | Execute workflow | Orchestration |

Is `invoke` distinct from `delegate`?
- `delegate`: Assign task to another **agent**
- `invoke`: Execute a defined **workflow**

**Yes, distinct.** Delegation is agent-to-agent; invocation is executing a composition.

Keep 3.

---

## 2. The Reassessed Capability Set

### 2.1 Summary Table

| Layer | Count | Capabilities |
|-------|-------|--------------|
| PERCEIVE | 4 | retrieve, search, observe, receive |
| UNDERSTAND | 6 | detect, classify, measure, predict, compare, discover |
| REASON | 4 | plan, decompose, critique, explain |
| MODEL | 5 | state, transition, attribute, ground, simulate |
| SYNTHESIZE | 3 | generate, transform, integrate |
| EXECUTE | 3 | execute, mutate, send |
| VERIFY | 5 | verify, checkpoint, rollback, constrain, audit |
| REMEMBER | 2 | persist, recall |
| COORDINATE | 3 | delegate, synchronize, invoke |
| **TOTAL** | **35** | |

### 2.2 Changes from Previous 36

| Previous | New | Change |
|----------|-----|--------|
| `inspect` | `observe` | Renamed — "observe" is more natural |
| `world-state` | `state` | Simplified |
| `state-transition` | `transition` | Simplified |
| `causal-model` | `attribute` | Renamed — verb form, clearer meaning |
| `resolve-identity` | (removed) | Demoted to workflow — composition of detect+classify+integrate |
| `execute` | `execute` | Kept |
| `mutate` | `mutate` | Kept (was `act`) |

**Net change**: 36 → 35 (removed `resolve-identity`)

---

## 3. Gap Analysis: What's Missing?

### 3.1 Candidates Considered

| Candidate | Assessment | Decision |
|-----------|------------|----------|
| `learn` | Adaptation based on feedback | **Missing?** |
| `reflect` | Introspection on own state | Covered by `observe` on self |
| `infer` | Draw logical conclusions | Covered by `detect` + `classify` |
| `abstract` | Extract general patterns | Covered by `discover` |
| `instantiate` | Apply template to data | Covered by `generate` + `transform` |
| `negotiate` | Multi-party agreement | Covered by `synchronize` |
| `prioritize` | Order by importance | Covered by `compare` |
| `schedule` | Temporal planning | Covered by `plan` |
| `monitor` | Continuous observation | Workflow pattern of repeated `observe` |
| `alert` | Notify on condition | Composition: `detect` + `send` |
| `validate` | Check preconditions | Merged into `verify` |

### 3.2 The "Learn" Question

**Should there be a `learn` capability?**

Arguments FOR:
- Agents should improve over time
- Learning is fundamental to intelligence
- Skills documentation mentions feedback loops

Arguments AGAINST:
- Learning is typically a **meta-process**, not a single operation
- In current LLM agents, "learning" happens through:
  - Context accumulation (not a capability)
  - Fine-tuning (external process)
  - Memory persistence (`persist` + `recall`)
- No agent framework (LangChain, AutoGPT, etc.) has an explicit "learn" primitive

**Decision**: Do NOT add `learn`. It's either:
1. A meta-process (fine-tuning, RLHF) — outside scope
2. A workflow pattern (`observe` → `compare` → `persist` improved behavior)
3. Implicit in memory operations

### 3.3 The "Wait" Question

**Should there be a `wait` capability for async operations?**

Skills documentation shows async patterns:
```
1. Start long-running operation
2. Wait for completion
3. Process result
```

Currently covered by:
- `receive` — Accept pushed data/events (includes waiting)
- `invoke` — Execute workflow (can be blocking)

**Decision**: Do NOT add `wait`. It's covered by `receive` (waiting for events) and `invoke` (blocking workflow execution).

### 3.4 The "Validate" vs "Verify" Question

We merged `validate` into `verify`. Is this correct?

- `validate`: Check that input meets requirements (precondition)
- `verify`: Check that output meets criteria (postcondition)

These are often used interchangeably in practice. The semantic distinction is:
- Validate = check BEFORE
- Verify = check AFTER

**Decision**: Keep single `verify` capability. The timing (pre/post) is context, not a different operation.

---

## 4. Final Reassessed Ontology

### 4.1 The 35 Capabilities

```
PERCEIVE (4)
├── retrieve     # Get specific data by reference
├── search       # Query by criteria
├── observe      # Watch current state
└── receive      # Accept pushed data/events

UNDERSTAND (6)
├── detect       # Find patterns/occurrences
├── classify     # Assign labels/categories
├── measure      # Quantify values
├── predict      # Forecast future states
├── compare      # Evaluate alternatives
└── discover     # Find unknown patterns

REASON (4)
├── plan         # Create action sequence
├── decompose    # Break into subproblems
├── critique     # Identify weaknesses
└── explain      # Justify conclusions

MODEL (5)
├── state        # Represent current world state
├── transition   # Define state dynamics
├── attribute    # Establish cause-effect relationships
├── ground       # Anchor claims to evidence
└── simulate     # Run what-if scenarios

SYNTHESIZE (3)
├── generate     # Produce new content
├── transform    # Convert between formats
└── integrate    # Merge multiple sources

EXECUTE (3)
├── execute      # Run code/script deterministically
├── mutate       # Change persistent state
└── send         # Transmit to external system

VERIFY (5)
├── verify       # Check conditions
├── checkpoint   # Save recovery point
├── rollback     # Restore from checkpoint
├── constrain    # Enforce limits
└── audit        # Record provenance

REMEMBER (2)
├── persist      # Store durably
└── recall       # Retrieve stored

COORDINATE (3)
├── delegate     # Assign task to another agent
├── synchronize  # Achieve state agreement
└── invoke       # Execute workflow

TOTAL: 35 CAPABILITIES
```

### 4.2 Layer Names

| Layer | Purpose | Cognitive Mapping |
|-------|---------|-------------------|
| PERCEIVE | Information acquisition | BDI: Belief acquisition |
| UNDERSTAND | Information interpretation | BDI: Belief formation |
| REASON | Planning and analysis | BDI: Deliberation |
| MODEL | World representation | BDI: World model |
| SYNTHESIZE | Content creation | Action planning |
| EXECUTE | World changes | BDI: Intention execution |
| VERIFY | Correctness assurance | Control theory |
| REMEMBER | State persistence | Cognitive: Long-term memory |
| COORDINATE | Multi-agent interaction | Multi-agent systems |

---

## 5. Comparison: DIS vs Reassessed

| DIS '23 Verb | Reassessed Capability | Notes |
|--------------|----------------------|-------|
| detect | `detect` | Kept |
| identify | `classify` | Renamed for clarity |
| estimate | `measure` | Renamed for clarity |
| forecast | `predict` | Renamed for clarity |
| compare | `compare` | Kept |
| discover | `discover` | Kept |
| generate | `generate` | Kept |
| act | `execute`, `mutate`, `send` | Split for precision |

**6 of 8 DIS verbs preserved** (with some renamed). The split of `act` is the major structural change.

---

## 6. Validation Against Skills

### PDF Processing Skill
| Operation | Capability |
|-----------|------------|
| Read PDF | `retrieve` |
| Analyze form | `detect` |
| Extract fields | `transform` |
| Create mapping | `state` |
| Validate mapping | `verify` |
| Run script | `execute` |
| Fill form | `mutate` |
| Verify output | `verify` |

**Coverage**: ✅ Complete

### Excel Analysis Skill
| Operation | Capability |
|-----------|------------|
| Load spreadsheet | `retrieve` |
| Analyze data | `detect` + `measure` |
| Compare metrics | `compare` |
| Predict trends | `predict` |
| Generate chart | `generate` |
| Save output | `persist` |

**Coverage**: ✅ Complete

### Multi-Agent Workflow
| Operation | Capability |
|-----------|------------|
| Break down task | `decompose` |
| Assign to agents | `delegate` |
| Run sub-workflows | `invoke` |
| Sync results | `synchronize` |
| Integrate outputs | `integrate` |
| Verify completion | `verify` |

**Coverage**: ✅ Complete

---

## 7. Conclusion

### The Reassessed 35 Capabilities

This first-principles reassessment confirms **35 capabilities** with:

1. **Simpler names**: `state` not `world-state`, `observe` not `inspect`
2. **Clearer semantics**: `attribute` for cause-effect, `mutate` for state changes
3. **No redundancy**: Removed `resolve-identity` (it's a composition)
4. **Complete coverage**: Validates against all Skills patterns

### Key Changes from Previous Iterations

| Iteration | Count | Major Change |
|-----------|-------|--------------|
| Original | 99 | Baseline |
| First-principles (DIS) | 39 | Parameterized domains |
| Tool-aligned | 35 | Industry alignment |
| Skills-aligned | 36 | Split `act` |
| **Reassessed** | **35** | Simplified names, removed redundancy |

### Confidence Assessment

| Aspect | Confidence | Notes |
|--------|------------|-------|
| Layer structure | HIGH | Maps to BDI/cognitive architecture |
| Capability count | HIGH | Survived multiple derivations |
| Capability names | HIGH | Simplified, verb-form |
| Completeness | HIGH | Validated against Skills patterns |
| No missing capabilities | MEDIUM | `learn` intentionally excluded |

---

## References

- [AGENT_ARCHITECTURE_RESEARCH.md](AGENT_ARCHITECTURE_RESEARCH.md)
- [SKILLS_ALIGNMENT_EVALUATION.md](SKILLS_ALIGNMENT_EVALUATION.md)
- [Claude Skills Overview](https://platform.claude.com/docs/en/agents-and-tools/agent-skills/overview)
- [Claude Skills Best Practices](https://platform.claude.com/docs/en/agents-and-tools/agent-skills/best-practices)

Commit message:

docs: update capability count references from 35 to 36
This commit updates various documentation files to reflect the addition of the new capability `inquire` to the COORDINATE layer, increasing the total capability count from 35 to 36. Changes include updates to README.md, FAQ.md, and multiple methodology documents to ensure consistency across the project. Additionally, references to the capability ontology and workflow catalog have been adjusted accordingly.

docs/methodology/FIRST_PRINCIPLES_REASSESSMENT.md, after:

# First-Principles Reassessment

**Document Status**: Critical Analysis
**Last Updated**: 2026-01-26
**Purpose**: Re-derive capabilities from first principles based on all research

---

## The Question

Starting fresh: **What are the irreducible cognitive operations an autonomous, grounded agent needs?**

---

## 1. First-Principles Derivation

### 1.1 The Agent Loop (from ReAct research)

Every agent operates in a loop:
```
PERCEIVE → UNDERSTAND → REASON → ACT → VERIFY → (repeat)
```

Plus cross-cutting concerns:
- **REMEMBER** — Persist state across loops
- **COORDINATE** — Work with other agents
- **MODEL** — Maintain world representation

### 1.2 Irreducible Operations per Phase

**PERCEIVE** — How agents acquire information:
| Operation | Description | Why Irreducible |
|-----------|-------------|-----------------|
| `retrieve` | Get specific data by ID/path | Pull by reference ≠ query |
| `search` | Query by criteria | Query ≠ pull |
| `observe` | Watch current state | Passive sensing ≠ active query |
| `receive` | Accept pushed data | Push ≠ pull |

Wait — is `observe` distinct from `retrieve` and `search`?
- `retrieve`: "Get file X" (known target)
- `search`: "Find files matching Y" (criteria-based)
- `observe`: "What is the current state?" (introspection)
- `receive`: "Wait for event Z" (passive)

**Yes, these are distinct.**

But can we simplify? Let's try:
- `get` — Acquire information (active)
- `receive` — Accept information (passive)

No, this loses important distinctions. `retrieve` vs `search` matters for agent reasoning. Keep 4.

---

**UNDERSTAND** — How agents make sense of information:
| Operation | Description | Why Irreducible |
|-----------|-------------|-----------------|
| `detect` | Find patterns/occurrences | Pattern matching |
| `classify` | Assign labels/categories | Categorization |
| `measure` | Quantify values | Quantification |
| `predict` | Forecast future | Temporal projection |
| `compare` | Evaluate options | Comparison |
| `discover` | Find unknown patterns | Exploration |

Is `discover` distinct from `detect`?
- `detect`: Find instances of a **known** pattern
- `discover`: Find **unknown** patterns in data

**Yes, semantically distinct.** Detection is recognition; discovery is exploration.

Can we combine `classify` and `detect`?
- `detect`: "Is there a cat in this image?" (binary/location)
- `classify`: "What kind of animal is this?" (categorization)

**No, these are different operations.** Keep 6.

---

**REASON** — How agents think and plan:
| Operation | Description | Why Irreducible |
|-----------|-------------|-----------------|
| `plan` | Create action sequence | Planning |
| `decompose` | Break into subproblems | Problem decomposition |
| `critique` | Identify weaknesses | Self-evaluation |
| `explain` | Justify conclusions | Explanation |

Is `decompose` distinct from `plan`?
- `plan`: Create a sequence of steps
- `decompose`: Break a problem into smaller problems

**Arguably redundant.** Decomposition is often part of planning. But Skills documentation shows hierarchical task decomposition as a distinct pattern.

Is `critique` distinct from `compare`?
- `compare`: Evaluate A vs B vs C
- `critique`: Find weaknesses in A

**Yes, distinct.** Critique is evaluation against an ideal, not comparison between options.

**Decision**: Keep `decompose` and `critique` — they're common enough patterns in agent workflows.

---

**MODEL** — How agents represent the world:

This is where your critique is most valid. Let's reconsider:

| Current Name | Proposed | Description |
|--------------|----------|-------------|
| `world-state` | `state` | Represent current world state |
| `state-transition` | `transition` | Represent how state changes |
| `causal-model` | `?` | Represent cause-effect |
| `ground` | `ground` | Anchor claims to evidence |
| `resolve-identity` | `resolve` | Deduplicate entities |
| `simulate` | `simulate` | Run what-if scenarios |

**Problem with `causal-model`**: "Model" as a verb is weak. What's the action?

Options:
1. `cause` — Awkward ("cause a relationship"?)
2. `attribute` — "Attribute effects to causes" (clearer!)
3. `link` — "Link causes to effects" (but too generic)
4. `model` — Generic, parameterized by type

**Actually, let's question whether we need separate modeling capabilities at all.**

What if MODELING is a single capability with parameters?
```yaml
model:
  input:
    target: any
    type: enum[state, transition, causation, schema]
  output:
    representation: structured_model
```

This parallels our DIS verb parameterization. But the Skills documentation shows these as distinct operations:
- Creating a state snapshot ≠ defining transitions
- Defining transitions ≠ establishing causation

**Decision**: Keep them separate but use simpler names:
- `state` — Create state representation
- `transition` — Define state dynamics
- `attribute` — Establish cause-effect (new name)
- `ground` — Anchor to evidence
- `resolve` — Deduplicate entities
- `simulate` — Run scenarios

Wait — is `resolve` (entity resolution) truly a fundamental capability? Or is it:
`detect` (find duplicates) + `classify` (same entity?) + `integrate` (merge)?

Let me check against Skills patterns... Entity resolution appears in data integration workflows. It's common enough to warrant a name, but maybe it's a workflow pattern?

**Decision**: Remove `resolve` — it's a composition of detect + classify + integrate. The MODELING layer becomes 5 capabilities.

---

**SYNTHESIZE** — How agents create new things:
| Operation | Description | Why Irreducible |
|-----------|-------------|-----------------|
| `generate` | Produce new content | Creation |
| `transform` | Convert between formats | Conversion |
| `integrate` | Merge multiple sources | Fusion |

These are distinct and necessary. Keep 3.

---

**EXECUTE** — How agents change the world:
| Operation | Description | Why Irreducible |
|-----------|-------------|-----------------|
| `execute` | Run code/script | Deterministic execution |
| `mutate` | Change persistent state | State change |
| `send` | Transmit externally | External communication |

Per Skills alignment, these are distinct:
- `execute`: Run a script, get output (deterministic, reversible in concept)
- `mutate`: Change a file/database (side effects, may not be reversible)
- `send`: Call external API (leaves your control)

Keep 3.

---

**VERIFY** — How agents ensure correctness:
| Operation | Description | Why Irreducible |
|-----------|-------------|-----------------|
| `verify` | Check conditions | Validation |
| `checkpoint` | Save state | Recovery point |
| `rollback` | Restore state | Recovery action |
| `constrain` | Enforce limits | Guardrails |
| `audit` | Record provenance | Accountability |

Are all 5 necessary?
- `verify`: Check postconditions — essential
- `checkpoint`: Save before risky operation — essential for recovery
- `rollback`: Restore on failure — essential for recovery
- `constrain`: Enforce limits — could be part of `verify`?
- `audit`: Record what happened — essential for accountability

`constrain` vs `verify`:
- `verify`: "Is X true?" (check)
- `constrain`: "Ensure X stays within bounds" (enforce)

**These are different.** Verify is passive checking; constrain is active enforcement.

Keep 5.

---

**REMEMBER** — How agents persist state:
| Operation | Description | Why Irreducible |
|-----------|-------------|-----------------|
| `persist` | Store durably | Write to memory |
| `recall` | Retrieve stored | Read from memory |

These are the minimal memory operations. Keep 2.

---

**COORDINATE** — How agents work together:
| Operation | Description | Why Irreducible |
|-----------|-------------|-----------------|
| `delegate` | Assign task to another | Task distribution |
| `synchronize` | Achieve state agreement | Consensus |
| `invoke` | Execute workflow | Orchestration |

Is `invoke` distinct from `delegate`?
- `delegate`: Assign task to another **agent**
- `invoke`: Execute a defined **workflow**

**Yes, distinct.** Delegation is agent-to-agent; invocation is executing a composition.

Keep 3.

---

## 2. The Reassessed Capability Set

### 2.1 Summary Table

| Layer | Count | Capabilities |
|-------|-------|--------------|
| PERCEIVE | 4 | retrieve, search, observe, receive |
| UNDERSTAND | 6 | detect, classify, measure, predict, compare, discover |
| REASON | 4 | plan, decompose, critique, explain |
| MODEL | 5 | state, transition, attribute, ground, simulate |
| SYNTHESIZE | 3 | generate, transform, integrate |
| EXECUTE | 3 | execute, mutate, send |
| VERIFY | 5 | verify, checkpoint, rollback, constrain, audit |
| REMEMBER | 2 | persist, recall |
| COORDINATE | 4 | delegate, synchronize, invoke, inquire |
| **TOTAL** | **36** | |

### 2.2 Changes from Previous 36

| Previous | New | Change |
|----------|-----|--------|
| `inspect` | `observe` | Renamed — "observe" is more natural |
| `world-state` | `state` | Simplified |
| `state-transition` | `transition` | Simplified |
| `causal-model` | `attribute` | Renamed — verb form, clearer meaning |
| `resolve-identity` | (removed) | Demoted to workflow — composition of detect+classify+integrate |
| `execute` | `execute` | Kept |
| `mutate` | `mutate` | Kept (was `act`) |

**Net change**: 36 → 35 (removed `resolve-identity`)

---

## 3. Gap Analysis: What's Missing?

### 3.1 Candidates Considered

| Candidate | Assessment | Decision |
|-----------|------------|----------|
| `learn` | Adaptation based on feedback | **Missing?** |
| `reflect` | Introspection on own state | Covered by `observe` on self |
| `infer` | Draw logical conclusions | Covered by `detect` + `classify` |
| `abstract` | Extract general patterns | Covered by `discover` |
| `instantiate` | Apply template to data | Covered by `generate` + `transform` |
| `negotiate` | Multi-party agreement | Covered by `synchronize` |
| `prioritize` | Order by importance | Covered by `compare` |
| `schedule` | Temporal planning | Covered by `plan` |
| `monitor` | Continuous observation | Workflow pattern of repeated `observe` |
| `alert` | Notify on condition | Composition: `detect` + `send` |
| `validate` | Check preconditions | Merged into `verify` |

### 3.2 The "Learn" Question

**Should there be a `learn` capability?**

Arguments FOR:
- Agents should improve over time
- Learning is fundamental to intelligence
- Skills documentation mentions feedback loops

Arguments AGAINST:
- Learning is typically a **meta-process**, not a single operation
- In current LLM agents, "learning" happens through:
  - Context accumulation (not a capability)
  - Fine-tuning (external process)
  - Memory persistence (`persist` + `recall`)
- No agent framework (LangChain, AutoGPT, etc.) has an explicit "learn" primitive

**Decision**: Do NOT add `learn`. It's either:
1. A meta-process (fine-tuning, RLHF) — outside scope
2. A workflow pattern (`observe` → `compare` → `persist` improved behavior)
3. Implicit in memory operations

### 3.3 The "Wait" Question

**Should there be a `wait` capability for async operations?**

Skills documentation shows async patterns:
```
1. Start long-running operation
2. Wait for completion
3. Process result
```

Currently covered by:
- `receive` — Accept pushed data/events (includes waiting)
- `invoke` — Execute workflow (can be blocking)

**Decision**: Do NOT add `wait`. It's covered by `receive` (waiting for events) and `invoke` (blocking workflow execution).

### 3.4 The "Validate" vs "Verify" Question

We merged `validate` into `verify`. Is this correct?

- `validate`: Check that input meets requirements (precondition)
- `verify`: Check that output meets criteria (postcondition)

These are often used interchangeably in practice. The semantic distinction is:
- Validate = check BEFORE
- Verify = check AFTER

**Decision**: Keep single `verify` capability. The timing (pre/post) is context, not a different operation.

---

## 4. Final Reassessed Ontology

### 4.1 The 35 Capabilities

```
PERCEIVE (4)
├── retrieve     # Get specific data by reference
├── search       # Query by criteria
├── observe      # Watch current state
└── receive      # Accept pushed data/events

UNDERSTAND (6)
├── detect       # Find patterns/occurrences
├── classify     # Assign labels/categories
├── measure      # Quantify values
├── predict      # Forecast future states
├── compare      # Evaluate alternatives
└── discover     # Find unknown patterns

REASON (4)
├── plan         # Create action sequence
├── decompose    # Break into subproblems
├── critique     # Identify weaknesses
└── explain      # Justify conclusions

MODEL (5)
├── state        # Represent current world state
├── transition   # Define state dynamics
├── attribute    # Establish cause-effect relationships
├── ground       # Anchor claims to evidence
└── simulate     # Run what-if scenarios

SYNTHESIZE (3)
├── generate     # Produce new content
├── transform    # Convert between formats
└── integrate    # Merge multiple sources

EXECUTE (3)
├── execute      # Run code/script deterministically
├── mutate       # Change persistent state
└── send         # Transmit to external system

VERIFY (5)
├── verify       # Check conditions
├── checkpoint   # Save recovery point
├── rollback     # Restore from checkpoint
├── constrain    # Enforce limits
└── audit        # Record provenance

REMEMBER (2)
├── persist      # Store durably
└── recall       # Retrieve stored

COORDINATE (4)
├── delegate     # Assign task to another agent
├── synchronize  # Achieve state agreement
├── invoke       # Execute workflow
└── inquire      # Request information from another agent

TOTAL: 36 CAPABILITIES
```

### 4.2 Layer Names

| Layer | Purpose | Cognitive Mapping |
|-------|---------|-------------------|
| PERCEIVE | Information acquisition | BDI: Belief acquisition |
| UNDERSTAND | Information interpretation | BDI: Belief formation |
| REASON | Planning and analysis | BDI: Deliberation |
| MODEL | World representation | BDI: World model |
| SYNTHESIZE | Content creation | Action planning |
| EXECUTE | World changes | BDI: Intention execution |
| VERIFY | Correctness assurance | Control theory |
| REMEMBER | State persistence | Cognitive: Long-term memory |
| COORDINATE | Multi-agent interaction | Multi-agent systems |

---

## 5. Comparison: DIS vs Reassessed

| DIS '23 Verb | Reassessed Capability | Notes |
|--------------|----------------------|-------|
| detect | `detect` | Kept |
| identify | `classify` | Renamed for clarity |
| estimate | `measure` | Renamed for clarity |
| forecast | `predict` | Renamed for clarity |
| compare | `compare` | Kept |
| discover | `discover` | Kept |
| generate | `generate` | Kept |
| act | `execute`, `mutate`, `send` | Split for precision |

**6 of 8 DIS verbs preserved** (with some renamed). The split of `act` is the major structural change.

---

## 6. Validation Against Skills

### PDF Processing Skill
| Operation | Capability |
|-----------|------------|
| Read PDF | `retrieve` |
| Analyze form | `detect` |
| Extract fields | `transform` |
| Create mapping | `state` |
| Validate mapping | `verify` |
| Run script | `execute` |
| Fill form | `mutate` |
| Verify output | `verify` |

**Coverage**: ✅ Complete

### Excel Analysis Skill
| Operation | Capability |
|-----------|------------|
| Load spreadsheet | `retrieve` |
| Analyze data | `detect` + `measure` |
| Compare metrics | `compare` |
| Predict trends | `predict` |
| Generate chart | `generate` |
| Save output | `persist` |

**Coverage**: ✅ Complete

### Multi-Agent Workflow
| Operation | Capability |
|-----------|------------|
| Break down task | `decompose` |
| Assign to agents | `delegate` |
| Run sub-workflows | `invoke` |
| Sync results | `synchronize` |
| Integrate outputs | `integrate` |
| Verify completion | `verify` |

**Coverage**: ✅ Complete

---

## 7. Conclusion

### The Reassessed 36 Capabilities

This first-principles reassessment confirms **36 capabilities** with:

1. **Simpler names**: `state` not `world-state`, `observe` not `inspect`
2. **Clearer semantics**: `attribute` for cause-effect, `mutate` for state changes
3. **No redundancy**: Removed `resolve-identity` (it's a composition)
4. **Complete coverage**: Validates against all Skills patterns

### Key Changes from Previous Iterations

| Iteration | Count | Major Change |
|-----------|-------|--------------|
| Original | 99 | Baseline |
| First-principles (DIS) | 39 | Parameterized domains |
| Tool-aligned | 35 | Industry alignment |
| Skills-aligned | 36 | Split `act` |
| **Reassessed** | **35** | Simplified names, removed redundancy |

### Confidence Assessment

| Aspect | Confidence | Notes |
|--------|------------|-------|
| Layer structure | HIGH | Maps to BDI/cognitive architecture |
| Capability count | HIGH | Survived multiple derivations |
| Capability names | HIGH | Simplified, verb-form |
| Completeness | HIGH | Validated against Skills patterns |
| No missing capabilities | MEDIUM | `learn` intentionally excluded |

---

## References

- [AGENT_ARCHITECTURE_RESEARCH.md](AGENT_ARCHITECTURE_RESEARCH.md)
- [SKILLS_ALIGNMENT_EVALUATION.md](SKILLS_ALIGNMENT_EVALUATION.md)
- [Claude Skills Overview](https://platform.claude.com/docs/en/agents-and-tools/agent-skills/overview)
- [Claude Skills Best Practices](https://platform.claude.com/docs/en/agents-and-tools/agent-skills/best-practices)
