skills/README.md, before:

# Agent Capability Skills

This directory contains **36 atomic capability skills** organized according to the capability ontology's **9 cognitive layers**, plus a small set of composed workflow/governance skills.

## Skill Layers

| Layer | Count | Purpose |
|-------|-------|---------|
| PERCEIVE | 4 | Acquire information from the world |
| UNDERSTAND | 6 | Make sense of information |
| REASON | 4 | Plan and analyze |
| MODEL | 5 | Represent the world |
| SYNTHESIZE | 3 | Create content |
| EXECUTE | 3 | Change the world |
| VERIFY | 5 | Ensure correctness |
| REMEMBER | 2 | Persist state |
| COORDINATE | 4 | Multi-agent and user interaction |
| Composed | 5 | Composed multi-step skills |

**Total: 36 atomic capabilities + 5 composed skills = 41 skills**

## The 36 Atomic Capabilities

### PERCEIVE (4)
Information acquisition from the world.

| Skill | Description |
|-------|-------------|
| `retrieve` | Get specific data by reference (ID, path, URI) |
| `search` | Query for data matching criteria |
| `observe` | Watch and report current state |
| `receive` | Accept pushed data or events |

### UNDERSTAND (6)
Making sense of information.

| Skill | Description |
|-------|-------------|
| `detect` | Find patterns or occurrences in data |
| `classify` | Assign labels or categories to items |
| `measure` | Quantify values with uncertainty |
| `predict` | Forecast future states or outcomes |
| `compare` | Evaluate alternatives against criteria |
| `discover` | Find previously unknown patterns |

### REASON (4)
Planning and analysis.

| Skill | Description |
|-------|-------------|
| `plan` | Create action sequence to achieve goal |
| `decompose` | Break problem into subproblems |
| `critique` | Identify weaknesses and issues |
| `explain` | Justify conclusions with reasoning |

### MODEL (5)
World representation.

| Skill | Description |
|-------|-------------|
| `state` | Create representation of current world state |
| `transition` | Define how state changes over time |
| `attribute` | Establish cause-effect relationships |
| `ground` | Anchor claims to evidence |
| `simulate` | Run what-if scenarios |

### SYNTHESIZE (3)
Content creation.

| Skill | Description |
|-------|-------------|
| `generate` | Produce new content |
| `transform` | Convert between formats |
| `integrate` | Merge data from multiple sources |

### EXECUTE (3)
Changing the world.

| Skill | Description |
|-------|-------------|
| `execute` | Run code or script deterministically |
| `mutate` | Change persistent state |
| `send` | Transmit data to external system |

### VERIFY (5)
Correctness assurance.

| Skill | Description |
|-------|-------------|
| `verify` | Check that conditions are met |
| `checkpoint` | Save state for potential recovery |
| `rollback` | Restore to previous checkpoint |
| `constrain` | Enforce limits and policies |
| `audit` | Record what happened and why |

### REMEMBER (2)
State persistence.

| Skill | Description |
|-------|-------------|
| `persist` | Store data durably |
| `recall` | Retrieve previously stored data |

### COORDINATE (4)
Multi-agent and user interaction.

| Skill | Description |
|-------|-------------|
| `delegate` | Assign task to another agent |
| `synchronize` | Achieve state agreement across agents |
| `invoke` | Execute a composed workflow |
| `inquire` | Request clarification when input is ambiguous |

## Composed Skills (5)

| Skill | Description |
|-------|-------------|
| `debug-workflow` | Execute a safe, auditable debugging workflow |
| `capability-gap-analysis` | Identify missing capabilities and propose additions |
| `digital-twin-bootstrap` | Initialize a digital twin from scratch |
| `digital-twin-sync-loop` | Synchronize digital twin state with reality |
| `perspective-validation` | Generate a PVC report for socio-technical review |

## Domain Parameterization

The 36-capability model uses **domain parameters** instead of many domain-specific skills:

```yaml
# Old model (99 capabilities)
- detect-anomaly
- detect-entity
- detect-person

# New model (36 capabilities)
- detect (domain: anomaly)
- detect (domain: entity)
- detect (domain: person)
```

Similarly:
- `measure` replaces: estimate-risk, estimate-impact, estimate-outcome
- `predict` replaces: forecast-risk, forecast-time, forecast-world
- `compare` replaces: compare-plans, compare-entities, prioritize

## Skill Structure

Each skill follows the SKILL.md format:

```markdown
---
name: skill-name
description: Brief description with trigger keywords
layer: LAYER_NAME
allowed-tools: Read, Grep, ...
agent: explore | general-purpose
---

## Intent
What this skill accomplishes

## Inputs
Parameter table

## Procedure
Step-by-step execution

## Output Contract
YAML schema for outputs

## Safety Constraints
Risk level and rules
```

## Layer Execution Flow

```
PERCEIVE → UNDERSTAND → REASON → EXECUTE
    ↓           ↓          ↓        ↓
  MODEL ←→ SYNTHESIZE ←→ VERIFY ←→ COORDINATE
    ↓           ↓
REMEMBER ←→ (persistence)
```

- **PERCEIVE** feeds observations to **UNDERSTAND**
- **UNDERSTAND** provides patterns to **REASON**
- **REASON** drives **EXECUTE** through plans
- **MODEL** represents world state
- **VERIFY** can intercept mutations
- **COORDINATE** enables multi-agent operations
- **REMEMBER** persists across cycles

## Migration from v1 (99 capabilities)

Domain-specific skills from v1 are archived in `_archive/skills/`. The capability mapping is documented in:
- `schemas/workflow_catalog.yaml` (header comment)
- `docs/methodology/FIRST_PRINCIPLES_REASSESSMENT.md`

## Usage

Skills can be invoked via:
1. Claude Code plugin skill invocation
2. Direct SKILL.md reading and execution
3. Workflow composition via `invoke`

See `schemas/capability_ontology.yaml` for the authoritative ontology definition.

Commit message:

chore: update changelog and documentation for v1.0.5 release
- Updated CHANGELOG.md to include notable changes for v1.0.5, detailing added features such as the multi-agent coordination runtime, NIST AI RMF 1.0 profile, EU AI Act conformity assessment, ISO 42001 documentation, and workflow execution engine.
- Enhanced README.md with versioning clarification and additional navigation paths for users.
- Expanded analysis documentation with role-specific quick access sections.
- Added multimodal support details to FAQ.md, clarifying capabilities for images, audio, and video.
- Updated QUICKSTART.md to reflect the increase in reference workflows from 5 to 12.
- Revised extension governance documentation to clarify skill creation process and current capability counts.
- Improved hooks documentation to specify configuration in hooks.json and detailed hook entry specifications.
- Updated skills documentation to note the relationship between composed skills and reference workflows.

skills/README.md, after:

# Agent Capability Skills

This directory contains **36 atomic capability skills** organized according to the capability ontology's **9 cognitive layers**, plus a small set of composed workflow/governance skills.

## Skill Layers

| Layer | Count | Purpose |
|-------|-------|---------|
| PERCEIVE | 4 | Acquire information from the world |
| UNDERSTAND | 6 | Make sense of information |
| REASON | 4 | Plan and analyze |
| MODEL | 5 | Represent the world |
| SYNTHESIZE | 3 | Create content |
| EXECUTE | 3 | Change the world |
| VERIFY | 5 | Ensure correctness |
| REMEMBER | 2 | Persist state |
| COORDINATE | 4 | Multi-agent and user interaction |
| Composed | 5 | Composed multi-step skills |

**Total: 36 atomic capabilities + 5 composed skills = 41 skills**

## The 36 Atomic Capabilities

### PERCEIVE (4)
Information acquisition from the world.

| Skill | Description |
|-------|-------------|
| `retrieve` | Get specific data by reference (ID, path, URI) |
| `search` | Query for data matching criteria |
| `observe` | Watch and report current state |
| `receive` | Accept pushed data or events |

### UNDERSTAND (6)
Making sense of information.

| Skill | Description |
|-------|-------------|
| `detect` | Find patterns or occurrences in data |
| `classify` | Assign labels or categories to items |
| `measure` | Quantify values with uncertainty |
| `predict` | Forecast future states or outcomes |
| `compare` | Evaluate alternatives against criteria |
| `discover` | Find previously unknown patterns |

### REASON (4)
Planning and analysis.

| Skill | Description |
|-------|-------------|
| `plan` | Create action sequence to achieve goal |
| `decompose` | Break problem into subproblems |
| `critique` | Identify weaknesses and issues |
| `explain` | Justify conclusions with reasoning |

### MODEL (5)
World representation.

| Skill | Description |
|-------|-------------|
| `state` | Create representation of current world state |
| `transition` | Define how state changes over time |
| `attribute` | Establish cause-effect relationships |
| `ground` | Anchor claims to evidence |
| `simulate` | Run what-if scenarios |

### SYNTHESIZE (3)
Content creation.

| Skill | Description |
|-------|-------------|
| `generate` | Produce new content |
| `transform` | Convert between formats |
| `integrate` | Merge data from multiple sources |

### EXECUTE (3)
Changing the world.

| Skill | Description |
|-------|-------------|
| `execute` | Run code or script deterministically |
| `mutate` | Change persistent state |
| `send` | Transmit data to external system |

### VERIFY (5)
Correctness assurance.

| Skill | Description |
|-------|-------------|
| `verify` | Check that conditions are met |
| `checkpoint` | Save state for potential recovery |
| `rollback` | Restore to previous checkpoint |
| `constrain` | Enforce limits and policies |
| `audit` | Record what happened and why |

### REMEMBER (2)
State persistence.

| Skill | Description |
|-------|-------------|
| `persist` | Store data durably |
| `recall` | Retrieve previously stored data |

### COORDINATE (4)
Multi-agent and user interaction.

| Skill | Description |
|-------|-------------|
| `delegate` | Assign task to another agent |
| `synchronize` | Achieve state agreement across agents |
| `invoke` | Execute a composed workflow |
| `inquire` | Request clarification when input is ambiguous |

## Composed Skills (5)

> **Note:** These 5 composed skills implement a subset of the [12 reference workflows](../schemas/workflow_catalog.yaml). Additional workflows can be composed by following the [Tutorial](../docs/TUTORIAL.md).

| Skill | Description |
|-------|-------------|
| `debug-workflow` | Execute a safe, auditable debugging workflow |
| `capability-gap-analysis` | Identify missing capabilities and propose additions |
| `digital-twin-bootstrap` | Initialize a digital twin from scratch |
| `digital-twin-sync-loop` | Synchronize digital twin state with reality |
| `perspective-validation` | Generate a PVC report for socio-technical review |

## Domain Parameterization

The 36-capability model uses **domain parameters** instead of many domain-specific skills:

```yaml
# Old model (99 capabilities)
- detect-anomaly
- detect-entity
- detect-person

# New model (36 capabilities)
- detect (domain: anomaly)
- detect (domain: entity)
- detect (domain: person)
```

Similarly:
- `measure` replaces: estimate-risk, estimate-impact, estimate-outcome
- `predict` replaces: forecast-risk, forecast-time, forecast-world
- `compare` replaces: compare-plans, compare-entities, prioritize

## Skill Structure

Each skill follows the SKILL.md format:

```markdown
---
name: skill-name
description: Brief description with trigger keywords
layer: LAYER_NAME
allowed-tools: Read, Grep, ...
agent: explore | general-purpose
---

## Intent
What this skill accomplishes

## Inputs
Parameter table

## Procedure
Step-by-step execution

## Output Contract
YAML schema for outputs

## Safety Constraints
Risk level and rules
```

## Layer Execution Flow

```
PERCEIVE → UNDERSTAND → REASON → EXECUTE
    ↓           ↓          ↓        ↓
  MODEL ←→ SYNTHESIZE ←→ VERIFY ←→ COORDINATE
    ↓           ↓
REMEMBER ←→ (persistence)
```

- **PERCEIVE** feeds observations to **UNDERSTAND**
- **UNDERSTAND** provides patterns to **REASON**
- **REASON** drives **EXECUTE** through plans
- **MODEL** represents world state
- **VERIFY** can intercept mutations
- **COORDINATE** enables multi-agent operations
- **REMEMBER** persists across cycles

## Migration from v1 (99 capabilities)

Domain-specific skills from v1 are archived in `_archive/skills/`. The capability mapping is documented in:
- `schemas/workflow_catalog.yaml` (header comment)
- `docs/methodology/FIRST_PRINCIPLES_REASSESSMENT.md`

## Usage

Skills can be invoked via:
1. Claude Code plugin skill invocation
2. Direct SKILL.md reading and execution
3. Workflow composition via `invoke`

See `schemas/capability_ontology.yaml` for the authoritative ontology definition.
