docs/FAQ.md, before:

# Frequently Asked Questions

## Strategic Questions

### Is this worth adopting?

**Yes, if you experience any of these pain points:**

- [ ] Agent gives confident but wrong answers (no grounding)
- [ ] Debugging agent decisions takes hours (no audit trail)
- [ ] Workflow failures corrupt data without rollback (no checkpoints)
- [ ] Audit asks "why did the agent do X?" and you can't answer (no lineage)
- [ ] Multiple data sources give conflicting answers (no trust model)
- [ ] Integration between agent steps is brittle (no typed contracts)

Even one checked box means this standard can help. Three or more, and adoption is strongly recommended.

### How do I convince my team?

Lead with concrete problems this solves:

1. **Reference past incidents**: "Remember when [agent failure] happened? This standard would have prevented that."
2. **Connect to compliance**: "Audit asked for decision lineage—this provides it automatically."
3. **Quantify debug time**: "We spent X hours debugging that agent issue. With grounding and audit trails, it's traceable in minutes."
4. **Show the validator**: Run `python tools/validate_workflows.py` on an example—seeing errors caught statically is compelling.

### What's the adoption path?

Incremental adoption works. You don't need to adopt everything at once.

| Timeline | Action | Outcome |
|----------|--------|---------|
| **Week 1** | Run validator on existing workflows | Find hidden issues |
| **Week 2** | Add checkpoints to mutation-heavy workflows | Enable rollback |
| **Month 1** | Implement grounding for high-risk capabilities | Traceable decisions |
| **Quarter 1** | Achieve L2 conformance | Full type safety |
| **Quarter 2** | Implement trust model for multi-source workflows | Conflict resolution |

### What if we only need part of it?

The standard is modular. Common partial adoptions:

- **Checkpoints only**: Just add `checkpoint` before mutations. Immediate rollback capability.
- **Validation only**: Use the validator without changing runtime. Catch errors statically.
- **Audit only**: Add `audit` steps for compliance without other changes.
- **Full safety layer**: Checkpoints + verification + rollback for high-risk workflows.

Start where the pain is worst, then expand as you see value.

---

## General

### What is the Agent Capability Standard?

A formal specification for building reliable AI agent systems. It defines:
- 36 atomic capabilities with typed I/O contracts across 9 cognitive layers
- A workflow DSL for composing capabilities with safety semantics
- Schemas for grounded world state and trust-aware conflict resolution
- Validation tools and conformance tests

### What is "Grounded Agency"?

Grounded Agency is the design philosophy behind the standard. It emphasizes that every agent action should be:
- **Grounded** — backed by evidence, not hallucination
- **Auditable** — with provenance and lineage
- **Safe** — mutations require checkpoints
- **Composable** — typed contracts between capabilities

### Why do we need this?

Most AI agent systems fail in production because:
- Composition is implicit (no contracts between capabilities)
- State is ungrounded (no provenance for claims)
- Conflict resolution is undefined (no trust model)
- Safety is retrofitted (no checkpoints or rollback)

This standard makes reliability structural, not optional.

### Who is this for?

- **Agent developers** building production systems
- **Platform engineers** designing agent frameworks
- **Researchers** studying agent architectures
- **Organizations** deploying AI agents in critical applications

---

## The 36 Capabilities

### Why exactly 36 capabilities?

The number 36 emerges from first-principles derivation:

1. **Foundation**: Cognitive architectures (BDI, ReAct, SOAR) provide the theoretical basis
2. **9 cognitive layers**: PERCEIVE, UNDERSTAND, REASON, MODEL, SYNTHESIZE, EXECUTE, VERIFY, REMEMBER, COORDINATE
3. **Domain parameterization**: Instead of 99 domain-specific skills (detect-anomaly, detect-entity), we use 36 atomic verbs with domain parameters (detect with domain: anomaly)
4. **Atomicity**: Each capability is truly irreducible and serves a single purpose

For the full derivation, see [docs/methodology/FIRST_PRINCIPLES_REASSESSMENT.md](methodology/FIRST_PRINCIPLES_REASSESSMENT.md).

### What happened to the 99 capabilities?

The original 99-capability model included many domain-specific variants. Through first-principles analysis, we discovered these could be unified:

| Old Model (99) | New Model (35) | Pattern |
|----------------|----------------|---------|
| detect-anomaly, detect-entity, detect-person | detect (domain: anomaly/entity/person) | Domain parameterization |
| estimate-risk, estimate-impact | measure (metric: risk/impact) | Metric parameterization |
| forecast-risk, forecast-time | predict (horizon: risk/time) | Horizon parameterization |

The archived 99-capability model is in `_archive/skills/` for reference.

### Is 35 the final number?

The ontology is **stable but extensible**. A 36th capability may be added if:
- It cannot be expressed as a composition of existing capabilities
- It passes atomicity tests (irreducible, single purpose, typed contract)
- It's used in at least one reference workflow
- It fits clearly into exactly one layer

See [Extension Governance](methodology/EXTENSION_GOVERNANCE.md) for the RFC process.

### Can I add my own capabilities?

Yes, through the governance process:

1. Open a GitHub issue proposing the capability
2. Create an RFC if the issue gains support
3. Demonstrate the capability meets all criteria (non-composable, atomic, useful)
4. After review, capability may be accepted

For most use cases, **composing existing capabilities** or **parameterizing with domains** is preferred.

### How do domain parameters work?

Instead of many domain-specific capabilities, use the atomic capability with a domain parameter:

```yaml
# Old approach (99 capabilities)
- capability: detect-anomaly
  store_as: anomaly_out

# New approach (36 capabilities)
- capability: detect
  domain: anomaly
  store_as: anomaly_out
```

This keeps the ontology small while preserving expressiveness.

### Is this like the periodic table?

The analogy captures the design philosophy:

| Chemistry | Grounded Agency |
|-----------|-----------------|
| ~118 elements | 36 capabilities |
| Atoms are irreducible | Capabilities are atomic |
| Molecules are compositions | Workflows are compositions |
| Element groups (metals, gases) | Capability layers (9 cognitive layers) |

**What the analogy means**: Capabilities are composable primitives. The goal is better workflows (molecules), not more capabilities (atoms).

**What it doesn't mean**: We don't claim physical law derivation or that 35 is fixed forever.

---

## Technical

### How is this different from LangChain/AutoGPT/etc?

Those are frameworks for building agents. This is a *specification* for agent capabilities and their composition. Key differences:

| Aspect | Frameworks | This Standard |
|--------|------------|---------------|
| Focus | Implementation | Specification |
| Contracts | Implicit | Explicit I/O schemas |
| Safety | Optional | By construction |
| Validation | Runtime | Static + runtime |
| Provenance | Rare | Required |

The standard can be implemented *within* existing frameworks.

### What languages are supported?

The standard is language-agnostic. The reference implementation uses Python, but the specification can be implemented in any language. The key artifacts are:
- JSON/YAML schemas
- Capability ontology
- Workflow definitions

### How do I validate my workflows?

```bash
# Validate against the specification
python tools/validate_workflows.py path/to/your/workflow.yaml

# Generate patch suggestions
python tools/validate_workflows.py --emit-patch
```

### What are the conformance levels?

| Level | What It Validates |
|-------|-------------------|
| L1 | Capability existence, prerequisites |
| L2 | Schema resolution, type inference |
| L3 | Binding types vs consumer contracts |
| L4 | Patch suggestions, coercion registry |

See [CONFORMANCE.md](../spec/CONFORMANCE.md) for details.

### How do bindings work?

Bindings reference outputs from earlier steps:

```yaml
- capability: observe
  store_as: observe_out

- capability: detect
  domain: anomaly
  input_bindings:
    context: ${observe_out.observation}  # References observe's output
```

Typed bindings add explicit type annotations:
```yaml
observations: ${integrate_out.merged.observations: array<object>}
```

### What are gates?

Gates are conditional checks that can halt or redirect execution:

```yaml
gates:
  - when: ${checkpoint_out.checkpoint_id} == null
    action: stop
    message: "No checkpoint created. Do not mutate."
```

### How does rollback work?

1. Before any mutation, create a checkpoint
2. Execute the mutation
3. Verify the outcome
4. If verification fails, rollback to the checkpoint

The standard enforces this pattern: `mutate` requires `checkpoint`.

---

## Implementation

### Can I add my own capabilities?

Yes. Define a new capability in your ontology extension:

```json
{
  "id": "my-custom-capability",
  "layer": "UNDERSTAND",
  "description": "What it does...",
  "input_schema": { ... },
  "output_schema": { ... },
  "risk": "low",
  "mutation": false
}
```

Then create a corresponding skill in `skills/my-custom-capability/SKILL.md`.

### Can I create my own workflows?

Yes. Define a workflow in YAML:

```yaml
my_workflow:
  goal: What this workflow achieves
  risk: medium
  steps:
    - capability: observe
      purpose: First step
      store_as: observe_out
    - capability: plan
      purpose: Create a plan
      store_as: plan_out
    - capability: checkpoint
      purpose: Save state
      store_as: checkpoint_out
    - capability: mutate
      purpose: Execute changes
      store_as: result
```

See [TUTORIAL.md](TUTORIAL.md) for a guided walkthrough.

### How do I extend the validator?

The validator is in `tools/validate_workflows.py`. You can:
- Add new validation rules
- Extend the coercion registry
- Add custom patch suggestions

### Is there a runtime executor?

The standard focuses on validation and specification. Runtime execution depends on your agent framework. The validator ensures workflows are *valid*; execution is implementation-dependent.

---

## Safety

### Why is checkpoint required before mutation?

Checkpoints enable rollback if something goes wrong. Without checkpoints:
- Failures are permanent
- Partial execution leaves inconsistent state
- Recovery requires manual intervention

The standard makes this protection automatic.

### What about prompt injection?

The standard addresses this through:
- Typed contracts (schema validation)
- Grounded claims (evidence requirements)
- Audit trails (traceability)

However, prompt injection defense is primarily a runtime concern. The standard provides the structure; implementation provides the defense.

### How is trust calculated?

Trust scores combine:
- **Source authority**: Configured weights per source
- **Recency**: Time decay with configurable half-life
- **Field-specific authority**: Sources may be authoritative for specific fields

See `schemas/trust_policy.yaml` for configuration.

---

## Adoption

### How do I get started?

1. Follow the [Quickstart Guide](QUICKSTART.md) (10 min)
2. Complete the [Tutorial](TUTORIAL.md) (30 min)
3. Read the [Specification](../spec/STANDARD-v1.0.0.md)

### Can I use this commercially?

Yes. The standard is Apache 2.0 licensed. You can use, modify, and distribute it in commercial products.

### How do I contribute?

1. Read [CONTRIBUTING.md](../CONTRIBUTING.md)
2. Follow the RFC process in [GOVERNANCE.md](../spec/GOVERNANCE.md)
3. Submit PRs for issues or enhancements

### Where can I get help?

- GitHub Issues: [Report bugs or ask questions](https://github.com/synaptiai/agent-capability-standard/issues)
- Discussions: [Join the conversation](https://github.com/synaptiai/agent-capability-standard/discussions)

---

## Comparison

### How does this relate to OpenAI function calling?

OpenAI function calling defines how to invoke tools. This standard defines:
- *What* capabilities exist (ontology)
- *How* they compose (workflow DSL)
- *What* contracts they satisfy (schemas)

Function calling is one way to *execute* capabilities; this standard defines the *specification*.

### How does this relate to MCP (Model Context Protocol)?

MCP defines how to connect tools to language models. This standard defines:
- Capability semantics and contracts
- Workflow composition and safety
- World state and trust models

They are complementary: MCP for connection, this standard for capability semantics.

---

Still have questions? [Open an issue](https://github.com/synaptiai/agent-capability-standard/issues/new).

Commit message:

docs: expand FAQ with rationale for rejecting PERCEIVE/REMEMBER/COORDINATE layer proposals
Add a new section explaining why proposed capabilities for the PERCEIVE, REMEMBER, and COORDINATE layers were not expanded. The rationale includes adherence to first principles, categorization of proposals, and clarification on the distinction between atomic capabilities and workflow patterns. This enhances the documentation's clarity regarding the capability model's structure and decision-making process.

docs/FAQ.md, after:

# Frequently Asked Questions

## Strategic Questions

### Is this worth adopting?

**Yes, if you experience any of these pain points:**

- [ ] Agent gives confident but wrong answers (no grounding)
- [ ] Debugging agent decisions takes hours (no audit trail)
- [ ] Workflow failures corrupt data without rollback (no checkpoints)
- [ ] Audit asks "why did the agent do X?" and you can't answer (no lineage)
- [ ] Multiple data sources give conflicting answers (no trust model)
- [ ] Integration between agent steps is brittle (no typed contracts)

Even one checked box means this standard can help. Three or more, and adoption is strongly recommended.

### How do I convince my team?

Lead with concrete problems this solves:

1. **Reference past incidents**: "Remember when [agent failure] happened? This standard would have prevented that."
2. **Connect to compliance**: "Audit asked for decision lineage—this provides it automatically."
3. **Quantify debug time**: "We spent X hours debugging that agent issue. With grounding and audit trails, it's traceable in minutes."
4. **Show the validator**: Run `python tools/validate_workflows.py` on an example—seeing errors caught statically is compelling.

### What's the adoption path?

Incremental adoption works. You don't need to adopt everything at once.

| Timeline | Action | Outcome |
|----------|--------|---------|
| **Week 1** | Run validator on existing workflows | Find hidden issues |
| **Week 2** | Add checkpoints to mutation-heavy workflows | Enable rollback |
| **Month 1** | Implement grounding for high-risk capabilities | Traceable decisions |
| **Quarter 1** | Achieve L2 conformance | Full type safety |
| **Quarter 2** | Implement trust model for multi-source workflows | Conflict resolution |

### What if we only need part of it?

The standard is modular. Common partial adoptions:

- **Checkpoints only**: Just add `checkpoint` before mutations. Immediate rollback capability.
- **Validation only**: Use the validator without changing runtime. Catch errors statically.
- **Audit only**: Add `audit` steps for compliance without other changes.
- **Full safety layer**: Checkpoints + verification + rollback for high-risk workflows.

Start where the pain is worst, then expand as you see value.

---

## Why weren't PERCEIVE/REMEMBER/COORDINATE layers expanded?

Issues #3, #4, and #5 proposed additional capabilities for these layers. After first-principles evaluation, all were rejected because they failed the criteria in `docs/methodology/FIRST_PRINCIPLES_REASSESSMENT.md`:

**Proposals that are workflow patterns:**
- `listen` = loop of `receive`
- `coordinate` = `decompose` + `delegate` + `synchronize` + `integrate`
- `compress` = `recall` + `integrate` + `transform` + `persist`

**Proposals that are parameter variations:**
- `sample` = `search` with `limit`
- `scan` = `search` with exhaustive query
- `broadcast` = `send` with multiple destinations

**Proposals covered by existing capabilities:**
- `observe` already exists
- `negotiate` covered by `synchronize`
- `handoff` covered by `delegate` with context
- `forget` covered by `persist(ttl: 0)` or `mutate(delete)`
- `index` and `associate` covered by MODEL layer capabilities

The 36-capability model represents genuinely **irreducible cognitive operations**. Workflow patterns belong in `schemas/workflow_catalog.yaml`, not as atomic capabilities.

---

## General

### What is the Agent Capability Standard?

A formal specification for building reliable AI agent systems. It defines:
- 36 atomic capabilities with typed I/O contracts across 9 cognitive layers
- A workflow DSL for composing capabilities with safety semantics
- Schemas for grounded world state and trust-aware conflict resolution
- Validation tools and conformance tests

### What is "Grounded Agency"?

Grounded Agency is the design philosophy behind the standard. It emphasizes that every agent action should be:
- **Grounded** — backed by evidence, not hallucination
- **Auditable** — with provenance and lineage
- **Safe** — mutations require checkpoints
- **Composable** — typed contracts between capabilities

### Why do we need this?

Most AI agent systems fail in production because:
- Composition is implicit (no contracts between capabilities)
- State is ungrounded (no provenance for claims)
- Conflict resolution is undefined (no trust model)
- Safety is retrofitted (no checkpoints or rollback)

This standard makes reliability structural, not optional.

### Who is this for?

- **Agent developers** building production systems
- **Platform engineers** designing agent frameworks
- **Researchers** studying agent architectures
- **Organizations** deploying AI agents in critical applications

---

## The 36 Capabilities

### Why exactly 36 capabilities?

The number 36 emerges from first-principles derivation:

1. **Foundation**: Cognitive architectures (BDI, ReAct, SOAR) provide the theoretical basis
2. **9 cognitive layers**: PERCEIVE, UNDERSTAND, REASON, MODEL, SYNTHESIZE, EXECUTE, VERIFY, REMEMBER, COORDINATE
3. **Domain parameterization**: Instead of 99 domain-specific skills (detect-anomaly, detect-entity), we use 36 atomic verbs with domain parameters (detect with domain: anomaly)
4. **Atomicity**: Each capability is truly irreducible and serves a single purpose

For the full derivation, see [docs/methodology/FIRST_PRINCIPLES_REASSESSMENT.md](methodology/FIRST_PRINCIPLES_REASSESSMENT.md).

### What happened to the 99 capabilities?

The original 99-capability model included many domain-specific variants. Through first-principles analysis, we discovered these could be unified:

| Old Model (99) | New Model (35) | Pattern |
|----------------|----------------|---------|
| detect-anomaly, detect-entity, detect-person | detect (domain: anomaly/entity/person) | Domain parameterization |
| estimate-risk, estimate-impact | measure (metric: risk/impact) | Metric parameterization |
| forecast-risk, forecast-time | predict (horizon: risk/time) | Horizon parameterization |

The archived 99-capability model is in `_archive/skills/` for reference.

### Is 35 the final number?

The ontology is **stable but extensible**. A 36th capability may be added if:
- It cannot be expressed as a composition of existing capabilities
- It passes atomicity tests (irreducible, single purpose, typed contract)
- It's used in at least one reference workflow
- It fits clearly into exactly one layer

See [Extension Governance](methodology/EXTENSION_GOVERNANCE.md) for the RFC process.

### Can I add my own capabilities?

Yes, through the governance process:

1. Open a GitHub issue proposing the capability
2. Create an RFC if the issue gains support
3. Demonstrate the capability meets all criteria (non-composable, atomic, useful)
4. After review, capability may be accepted

For most use cases, **composing existing capabilities** or **parameterizing with domains** is preferred.

### How do domain parameters work?

Instead of many domain-specific capabilities, use the atomic capability with a domain parameter:

```yaml
# Old approach (99 capabilities)
- capability: detect-anomaly
  store_as: anomaly_out

# New approach (36 capabilities)
- capability: detect
  domain: anomaly
  store_as: anomaly_out
```

This keeps the ontology small while preserving expressiveness.

### Is this like the periodic table?

The analogy captures the design philosophy:

| Chemistry | Grounded Agency |
|-----------|-----------------|
| ~118 elements | 36 capabilities |
| Atoms are irreducible | Capabilities are atomic |
| Molecules are compositions | Workflows are compositions |
| Element groups (metals, gases) | Capability layers (9 cognitive layers) |

**What the analogy means**: Capabilities are composable primitives. The goal is better workflows (molecules), not more capabilities (atoms).

**What it doesn't mean**: We don't claim physical law derivation or that 35 is fixed forever.

---

## Technical

### How is this different from LangChain/AutoGPT/etc?

Those are frameworks for building agents. This is a *specification* for agent capabilities and their composition. Key differences:

| Aspect | Frameworks | This Standard |
|--------|------------|---------------|
| Focus | Implementation | Specification |
| Contracts | Implicit | Explicit I/O schemas |
| Safety | Optional | By construction |
| Validation | Runtime | Static + runtime |
| Provenance | Rare | Required |

The standard can be implemented *within* existing frameworks.

### What languages are supported?

The standard is language-agnostic. The reference implementation uses Python, but the specification can be implemented in any language. The key artifacts are:
- JSON/YAML schemas
- Capability ontology
- Workflow definitions

### How do I validate my workflows?

```bash
# Validate against the specification
python tools/validate_workflows.py path/to/your/workflow.yaml

# Generate patch suggestions
python tools/validate_workflows.py --emit-patch
```

### What are the conformance levels?

| Level | What It Validates |
|-------|-------------------|
| L1 | Capability existence, prerequisites |
| L2 | Schema resolution, type inference |
| L3 | Binding types vs consumer contracts |
| L4 | Patch suggestions, coercion registry |

See [CONFORMANCE.md](../spec/CONFORMANCE.md) for details.

### How do bindings work?

Bindings reference outputs from earlier steps:

```yaml
- capability: observe
  store_as: observe_out

- capability: detect
  domain: anomaly
  input_bindings:
    context: ${observe_out.observation}  # References observe's output
```

Typed bindings add explicit type annotations:
```yaml
observations: ${integrate_out.merged.observations: array<object>}
```

### What are gates?

Gates are conditional checks that can halt or redirect execution:

```yaml
gates:
  - when: ${checkpoint_out.checkpoint_id} == null
    action: stop
    message: "No checkpoint created. Do not mutate."
```

### How does rollback work?

1. Before any mutation, create a checkpoint
2. Execute the mutation
3. Verify the outcome
4. If verification fails, rollback to the checkpoint

The standard enforces this pattern: `mutate` requires `checkpoint`.

---

## Implementation

### Can I add my own capabilities?

Yes. Define a new capability in your ontology extension:

```json
{
  "id": "my-custom-capability",
  "layer": "UNDERSTAND",
  "description": "What it does...",
  "input_schema": { ... },
  "output_schema": { ... },
  "risk": "low",
  "mutation": false
}
```

Then create a corresponding skill in `skills/my-custom-capability/SKILL.md`.

### Can I create my own workflows?

Yes. Define a workflow in YAML:

```yaml
my_workflow:
  goal: What this workflow achieves
  risk: medium
  steps:
    - capability: observe
      purpose: First step
      store_as: observe_out
    - capability: plan
      purpose: Create a plan
      store_as: plan_out
    - capability: checkpoint
      purpose: Save state
      store_as: checkpoint_out
    - capability: mutate
      purpose: Execute changes
      store_as: result
```

See [TUTORIAL.md](TUTORIAL.md) for a guided walkthrough.

### How do I extend the validator?

The validator is in `tools/validate_workflows.py`. You can:
- Add new validation rules
- Extend the coercion registry
- Add custom patch suggestions

### Is there a runtime executor?

The standard focuses on validation and specification. Runtime execution depends on your agent framework. The validator ensures workflows are *valid*; execution is implementation-dependent.

---

## Safety

### Why is checkpoint required before mutation?

Checkpoints enable rollback if something goes wrong. Without checkpoints:
- Failures are permanent
- Partial execution leaves inconsistent state
- Recovery requires manual intervention

The standard makes this protection automatic.

### What about prompt injection?

The standard addresses this through:
- Typed contracts (schema validation)
- Grounded claims (evidence requirements)
- Audit trails (traceability)

However, prompt injection defense is primarily a runtime concern. The standard provides the structure; implementation provides the defense.

### How is trust calculated?

Trust scores combine:
- **Source authority**: Configured weights per source
- **Recency**: Time decay with configurable half-life
- **Field-specific authority**: Sources may be authoritative for specific fields

See `schemas/trust_policy.yaml` for configuration.

---

## Adoption

### How do I get started?

1. Follow the [Quickstart Guide](QUICKSTART.md) (10 min)
2. Complete the [Tutorial](TUTORIAL.md) (30 min)
3. Read the [Specification](../spec/STANDARD-v1.0.0.md)

### Can I use this commercially?

Yes. The standard is Apache 2.0 licensed. You can use, modify, and distribute it in commercial products.

### How do I contribute?

1. Read [CONTRIBUTING.md](../CONTRIBUTING.md)
2. Follow the RFC process in [GOVERNANCE.md](../spec/GOVERNANCE.md)
3. Submit PRs for issues or enhancements

### Where can I get help?

- GitHub Issues: [Report bugs or ask questions](https://github.com/synaptiai/agent-capability-standard/issues)
- Discussions: [Join the conversation](https://github.com/synaptiai/agent-capability-standard/discussions)

---

## Comparison

### How does this relate to OpenAI function calling?

OpenAI function calling defines how to invoke tools. This standard defines:
- *What* capabilities exist (ontology)
- *How* they compose (workflow DSL)
- *What* contracts they satisfy (schemas)

Function calling is one way to *execute* capabilities; this standard defines the *specification*.

### How does this relate to MCP (Model Context Protocol)?

MCP defines how to connect tools to language models. This standard defines:
- Capability semantics and contracts
- Workflow composition and safety
- World state and trust models

They are complementary: MCP for connection, this standard for capability semantics.

---

Still have questions? [Open an issue](https://github.com/synaptiai/agent-capability-standard/issues/new).
